[Table of contents](_tableOfContents.md)  
Next: [System requirements and installation](systemRequirements.md)

# _Fsseudonymizer:_ Purpose of the application

[In our work](https://epidemiology.sruc.ac.uk/projects/), we occasionally encounter situations in which we might wish to use data that identifies individual people, businesses, animals, or facilities.  It is often essential, for example, that we are able to follow events that occur on an individual premises, or to pull together information from several different sources that pertain to a particular person, animal, or location.

In many of these cases, however, such data is sensitive or confidential: information provided by businesses, for example, might be confidential, and personal information pertaining to individuals is often protected by law.

In order for our work to be successful, then, two seemingly contradictory criteria must be fulfilled:

  - Personal or confidential data that might reveal the specific identity of a person, or a precise location of a particular premises cannot be revealed.
  - However, in order to ensure the validity of our work, it must be possible to uniquely identify all individuals, premises, etc., across multiple data sets.

In order to address both of these requirements, we have developed several approaches for processing data that will allow the assignment of unique pseudonymous identifiers to individuals or entities without revealing confidential or personal information.  These approaches can be applied to data from multiple sources by the data providers themselves, thus never revealing any personal or confidential information to any unauthorized individual or organization.

_Fsseudonymizer_ is a computer program that implements a straightforward but highly effective, secure, and consistent approach for pseudonymizing data for subsequent analysis.  _Fsseudonymizer_ makes use of an original piece of data (for example, a name) in combination with a pass phrase (described [here](usage.md)) and a computational algorithm known as a cryptographic hash (described in more detail [here](techDetails.md)) to generate a unique, pseudonymous representation of the original data, called a "hash value".  It is not possible to recover the original data from the hash value.  These hash values, then, are meet both of the requirements mentioned above: personal or confidential data is not revealed, but the pseudonymous identifier is unique.

The example below shows an original piece of data (a name) and the hash value generated by _Fsseudonymizer_.  The hash value is a unique, pseudonymous identifier:

| Name             | Hash value                                               |
|------------------|----------------------------------------------------------|
| Homer Simpson    | eb756672f9d92067409026d3acd7dedd57912cca229fdce6a9577c28 |

_Fsseudonymizer_ accepts data provided in tabular formats [currently _Microsoft Excel_ spreadsheets or [CSV (comma-separated values)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Comma-separated_values) files] and generates a pseudonymized version of the original input data.  For more details about input and output file formats, please see the page on [Using the program](usage.md).

The table below illustrates a simple tabular data set suitable for use with _Fsseudonymizer_.

| Name          | Age | Height-inches | Weight-pounds |
|:--------------|----:|--------------:|--------------:|
| Hank Hill     | 39  | 73            | 220           |
| Eric Cartman  | 10  | 38            | 100           |
| Marge Simpson | 43  | 78            | 135           |

A more detailed description of the algorithm implemented by _Fsseudonymizer_ is provided [here](techDetails.md).
